doc/api_ref/pbkdf.rst, before:


.. _pbkdf:

Password Based Key Derivation
========================================

Often one needs to convert a human readable password into a cryptographic
key. It is useful to slow down the computation of these computations in order to
reduce the speed of brute force search, thus they are parameterized in some
way which allows their required computation to be tuned.

PasswordHash
--------------

.. versionadded:: 2.8.0

This API, declared in ``pwdhash.h``, has two classes, ``PasswordHashFamily``
representing the general algorithm, such as "PBKDF2(SHA-256)", or "Scrypt", and
``PasswordHash`` representing a specific instance of the problem which is fully
specified with all parameters (say "Scrypt" with ``N`` = 8192, ``r`` = 64, and
``p`` = 8) and which can be used to derive keys.

.. cpp:class:: PasswordHash

   .. cpp:function:: void hash(std::span<uint8_t> out, \
                               std::string_view password, \
                               std::span<uint8> salt)

      Derive a key from the specified *password* and *salt*, placing it into *out*.

   .. cpp:function:: void hash(std::span<uint8_t> out, \
                               std::string_view password, \
                               std::span<const uint8> salt, \
                               std::span<const uint8> ad, \
                               std::span<const uint8> key)

      Derive a key from the specified *password*, *salt*, associated data (*ad*), and
      secret *key*, placing it into *out*. The *ad* and *key* are both allowed
      to be empty. Currently non-empty AD/key is only supported with Argon2.

   .. cpp:function:: void derive_key(uint8_t out[], size_t out_len, \
                     const char* password, const size_t password_len, \
                     const uint8_t salt[], size_t salt_len) const

      Same functionality as the 3 argument variant of :cpp:func:`PasswordHash::hash`.

   .. cpp:function:: void derive_key(uint8_t out[], size_t out_len, \
                     const char* password, const size_t password_len, \
                     const uint8_t salt[], size_t salt_len, \
                     const uint8_t ad[], size_t ad_len, \
                     const uint8_t key[], size_t key_len) const

       Same functionality as the 5 argument variant of :cpp:func:`PasswordHash::hash`.

   .. cpp:function:: std::string to_string() const

      Return a descriptive string including the parameters (iteration count, etc)

   .. cpp:function:: size_t iterations() const

      Return the iteration parameter

   .. cpp:function:: size_t memory_param() const

      Return the memory usage parameter, or 0 if the algorithm does not offer
      a memory usage option.

   .. cpp:function:: size_t parallelism() const

      Returns the parallelism parameter, or 0 if the algorithm does not offer a
      parallelism option.

   .. cpp:function:: size_t total_memory_usage() const

      Return a guesstimate of the total number of bytes of memory consumed when
      running this algorithm. If the function is not intended to be memory-hard
      and uses an effictively fixed amount of memory when running, this function
      returns 0.

   .. cpp:function:: bool supports_keyed_operation() const

      Returns true if this password hash supports supplying a secret key
      to :cpp:func:`PasswordHash::hash`.

   .. cpp:function:: bool supports_associated_data() const

      Returns true if this password hash supports supplying associated data
      to :cpp:func:`PasswordHash::hash`.

The ``PasswordHashFamily`` creates specific instances of ``PasswordHash``:

.. cpp:class:: PasswordHashFamily

   .. cpp:function:: static std::unique_ptr<PasswordHashFamily> create(const std::string& what)

      For example "PBKDF2(SHA-256)", "Scrypt", "Argon2id". Returns null if the
      algorithm is not available.

   .. cpp:function:: std::unique_ptr<PasswordHash> default_params() const

      Create a default instance of the password hashing algorithm. Be warned the
      value returned here may change from release to release.

   .. cpp:function:: std::unique_ptr<PasswordHash> tune( \
                     size_t output_len, \
                     std::chrono::milliseconds msec, \
                     size_t max_memory_usage_mb = 0, \
                     std::chrono::milliseconds tuning_msec = std::chrono::milliseconds(10)) const

      Return a password hash instance tuned to run for approximately ``msec``
      milliseconds when producing an output of length ``output_len``. (Accuracy
      may vary, use the command line utility ``botan pbkdf_tune`` to check.)

      The parameters will be selected to use at most *max_memory_usage_mb* megabytes
      of memory, or if left as zero any size is allowed.

      This function works by runing a short tuning loop to estimate the
      performance of the algorithm, then scaling the parameters appropriately to
      hit the target size. The length of time the tuning loop runs can be
      controlled using the *tuning_msec* parameter.

   .. cpp:function:: std::unique_ptr<PasswordHash> from_params( \
         size_t i1, size_t i2 = 0, size_t i3 = 0) const

      Create a password hash using some scheme specific format. Parameters are as follows:

      * For PBKDF2, PGP-S2K, and Bcrypt-PBKDF, ``i1`` is iterations
      * Scrypt uses ``i1`` == ``N``, ``i2`` == ``r``, and ``i3`` == ``p``
      * Argon2 family uses ``i1`` == ``M``, ``i2`` == ``t``, and ``i3`` == ``p``

      All unneeded parameters should be set to 0 or left blank.

.. _pbkdf_example:

Code Example
------------

An example demonstrating using the API to hash a password using Argon2i:

.. literalinclude:: /../src/examples/pwdhash.cpp
   :language: cpp

Available Schemes
----------------------

General Recommendations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you need wide interoperability use PBKDF2 with HMAC-SHA256 and at least 50K
iterations. If you don't, use Argon2id with p=1, t=3 and M as large as you
can reasonably set (say 1 gigabyte).

You can test how long a particular PBKDF takes to execute using the cli tool
``pbkdf_tune``::

  $ ./botan pbkdf_tune --algo=Argon2id 500 --max-mem=192 --check
  For 500 ms selected Argon2id(196608,3,1) using 192 MiB took 413.159 msec to compute

This returns the parameters chosen by the fast auto-tuning algorithm, and
because ``--check`` was supplied the hash is also executed with the full set of
parameters and timed.

PBKDF2
^^^^^^^^^^^^

PBKDF2 is the "standard" password derivation scheme, widely implemented in many
different libraries. It uses HMAC internally and requires choosing a hash
function to use. (If in doubt use SHA-256 or SHA-512). It also requires choosing
an iteration count, which makes brute force attacks more expensive. Use *at
least* 50000 and preferably much more. Using 250,000 would not be unreasonable.

Algorithm specification name:
``PBKDF2(<MessageAuthenticationCode|HashFunction>)``,
e.g. ``PBKDF2(HMAC(SHA-256))``

If a ``HashFunction`` is provided as an argument,
it will create ``HMAC(HashFunction)`` as the ``MessageAuthenticationCode``.
I.e. ``PBKDF2(SHA-256)`` will result in ``PBKDF2(HMAC(SHA-256))``.

Scrypt
^^^^^^^^^^

.. versionadded:: 2.7.0

Scrypt is a relatively newer design which is "memory hard" - in
addition to requiring large amounts of CPU power it uses a large block
of memory to compute the hash. This makes brute force attacks using
ASICs substantially more expensive.

Scrypt has three parameters, usually termed ``N``, ``r``, and ``p``.  ``N`` is
the primary control of the workfactor, and must be a power of 2. For interactive
logins use 32768, for protection of secret keys or backups use 1048576.

The ``r`` parameter controls how 'wide' the internal hashing operation is. It
also increases the amount of memory that is used. Values from 1 to 8 are
reasonable.

Setting ``p`` parameter to greater than 1 splits up the work in a way that up
to p processors can work in parallel.

As a general recommendation, use ``N`` = 32768, ``r`` = 8, ``p`` = 1

Algorithm specification name: ``Scrypt``

Argon2
^^^^^^^^^^

.. versionadded:: 2.11.0

Argon2 is the winner of the PHC (Password Hashing Competition) and
provides a tunable memory hard PBKDF. There are three minor variants
of Argon2 - Argon2d, Argon2i, and Argon2id. All three are implemented.

Algorithm specification names:

- ``Argon2d``
- ``Argon2i``
- ``Argon2id``

Bcrypt
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. versionadded:: 2.11.0

Bcrypt-PBKDF is a variant of the well known ``bcrypt`` password hashing
function.  Like ``bcrypt`` it is based around using Blowfish for the key
expansion, which requires 4 KiB of fast random access memory, making hardware
based attacks more expensive. Unlike Argon2 or Scrypt, the memory usage is not
tunable.

This function is relatively obscure but is used for example in OpenSSH.
Prefer Argon2 or Scrypt in new systems.

Algorithm specification name: ``Bcrypt-PBKDF``

OpenPGP S2K
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. warning::

   The OpenPGP algorithm is weak and strange, and should be avoided unless
   implementing OpenPGP.

There are some oddities about OpenPGP's S2K algorithms that are documented
here. For one thing, it uses the iteration count in a strange manner; instead of
specifying how many times to iterate the hash, it tells how many *bytes* should
be hashed in total (including the salt). So the exact iteration count will
depend on the size of the salt (which is fixed at 8 bytes by the OpenPGP
standard, though the implementation will allow any salt size) and the size of
the passphrase.

To get what OpenPGP calls "Simple S2K", set iterations to 0, and do not specify
a salt. To get "Salted S2K", again leave the iteration count at 0, but give an
8-byte salt. "Salted and Iterated S2K" requires an 8-byte salt and some
iteration count (this should be significantly larger than the size of the
longest passphrase that might reasonably be used; somewhere from 1024 to 65536
would probably be about right). Using both a reasonably sized salt and a large
iteration count is highly recommended to prevent password guessing attempts.

Algorithm specification name:
``OpenPGP-S2K(<HashFunction>)``, e.g. ``OpenPGP-S2K(SHA-384)``

PBKDF
---------

:cpp:class:`PBKDF` is the older API for this functionality, presented in header
``pbkdf.h``. It only supports PBKDF2 and the PGP S2K algorithm, not
Scrypt, Argon2, or bcrypt. This interface is deprecated and will be removed
in a future major release.

In addition, this API requires the passphrase be entered as a
``std::string``, which means the secret will be stored in memory that
will not be zeroed.

.. cpp:class:: PBKDF

   .. cpp:function:: static std::unique_ptr<PBKDF> create(const std::string& algo_spec, \
                                                          const std::string& provider = "")

      Return a newly created PBKDF object. The name should be in the
      format "PBKDF2(HASHNAME)", "PBKDF2(HMAC(HASHNAME))", or
      "OpenPGP-S2K".  Returns null if the algorithm is not available.

   .. cpp:function:: void pbkdf_iterations(uint8_t out[], size_t out_len, \
                            const std::string& passphrase, \
                            const uint8_t salt[], size_t salt_len, \
                            size_t iterations) const

      Run the PBKDF algorithm for the specified number of iterations,
      with the given salt, and write output to the buffer.

   .. cpp:function:: void pbkdf_timed(uint8_t out[], size_t out_len, \
                         const std::string& passphrase, \
                         const uint8_t salt[], size_t salt_len, \
                         std::chrono::milliseconds msec, \
                         size_t& iterations) const

      Choose (via short run-time benchmark) how many iterations to perform
      in order to run for roughly msec milliseconds. Writes the number
      of iterations used to reference argument.

   .. cpp:function:: OctetString derive_key( \
               size_t output_len, const std::string& passphrase, \
               const uint8_t* salt, size_t salt_len, \
               size_t iterations) const

   Computes a key from *passphrase* and the *salt* (of length
   *salt_len* bytes) using an algorithm-specific interpretation of
   *iterations*, producing a key of length *output_len*.

   Use an iteration count of at least 10000. The salt should be
   randomly chosen by a good random number generator (see
   :ref:`random_number_generators` for how), or at the very least
   unique to this usage of the passphrase.

   If you call this function again with the same parameters, you will
   get the same key.

Commit message:

Doc: example to encrypt a message using a password

doc/api_ref/pbkdf.rst, after:


.. _pbkdf:

Password Based Key Derivation
========================================

Often one needs to convert a human readable password into a cryptographic
key. It is useful to slow down the computation of these computations in order to
reduce the speed of brute force search, thus they are parameterized in some
way which allows their required computation to be tuned.

PasswordHash
--------------

.. versionadded:: 2.8.0

This API, declared in ``pwdhash.h``, has two classes, ``PasswordHashFamily``
representing the general algorithm, such as "PBKDF2(SHA-256)", or "Scrypt", and
``PasswordHash`` representing a specific instance of the problem which is fully
specified with all parameters (say "Scrypt" with ``N`` = 8192, ``r`` = 64, and
``p`` = 8) and which can be used to derive keys.

.. cpp:class:: PasswordHash

   .. cpp:function:: void hash(std::span<uint8_t> out, \
                               std::string_view password, \
                               std::span<uint8> salt)

      Derive a key from the specified *password* and *salt*, placing it into *out*.

   .. cpp:function:: void hash(std::span<uint8_t> out, \
                               std::string_view password, \
                               std::span<const uint8> salt, \
                               std::span<const uint8> ad, \
                               std::span<const uint8> key)

      Derive a key from the specified *password*, *salt*, associated data (*ad*), and
      secret *key*, placing it into *out*. The *ad* and *key* are both allowed
      to be empty. Currently non-empty AD/key is only supported with Argon2.

   .. cpp:function:: void derive_key(uint8_t out[], size_t out_len, \
                     const char* password, const size_t password_len, \
                     const uint8_t salt[], size_t salt_len) const

      Same functionality as the 3 argument variant of :cpp:func:`PasswordHash::hash`.

   .. cpp:function:: void derive_key(uint8_t out[], size_t out_len, \
                     const char* password, const size_t password_len, \
                     const uint8_t salt[], size_t salt_len, \
                     const uint8_t ad[], size_t ad_len, \
                     const uint8_t key[], size_t key_len) const

       Same functionality as the 5 argument variant of :cpp:func:`PasswordHash::hash`.

   .. cpp:function:: std::string to_string() const

      Return a descriptive string including the parameters (iteration count, etc)

   .. cpp:function:: size_t iterations() const

      Return the iteration parameter

   .. cpp:function:: size_t memory_param() const

      Return the memory usage parameter, or 0 if the algorithm does not offer
      a memory usage option.

   .. cpp:function:: size_t parallelism() const

      Returns the parallelism parameter, or 0 if the algorithm does not offer a
      parallelism option.

   .. cpp:function:: size_t total_memory_usage() const

      Return a guesstimate of the total number of bytes of memory consumed when
      running this algorithm. If the function is not intended to be memory-hard
      and uses an effictively fixed amount of memory when running, this function
      returns 0.

   .. cpp:function:: bool supports_keyed_operation() const

      Returns true if this password hash supports supplying a secret key
      to :cpp:func:`PasswordHash::hash`.

   .. cpp:function:: bool supports_associated_data() const

      Returns true if this password hash supports supplying associated data
      to :cpp:func:`PasswordHash::hash`.

The ``PasswordHashFamily`` creates specific instances of ``PasswordHash``:

.. cpp:class:: PasswordHashFamily

   .. cpp:function:: static std::unique_ptr<PasswordHashFamily> create(const std::string& what)

      For example "PBKDF2(SHA-256)", "Scrypt", "Argon2id". Returns null if the
      algorithm is not available.

   .. cpp:function:: std::unique_ptr<PasswordHash> default_params() const

      Create a default instance of the password hashing algorithm. Be warned the
      value returned here may change from release to release.

   .. cpp:function:: std::unique_ptr<PasswordHash> tune( \
                     size_t output_len, \
                     std::chrono::milliseconds msec, \
                     size_t max_memory_usage_mb = 0, \
                     std::chrono::milliseconds tuning_msec = std::chrono::milliseconds(10)) const

      Return a password hash instance tuned to run for approximately ``msec``
      milliseconds when producing an output of length ``output_len``. (Accuracy
      may vary, use the command line utility ``botan pbkdf_tune`` to check.)

      The parameters will be selected to use at most *max_memory_usage_mb* megabytes
      of memory, or if left as zero any size is allowed.

      This function works by runing a short tuning loop to estimate the
      performance of the algorithm, then scaling the parameters appropriately to
      hit the target size. The length of time the tuning loop runs can be
      controlled using the *tuning_msec* parameter.

   .. cpp:function:: std::unique_ptr<PasswordHash> from_params( \
         size_t i1, size_t i2 = 0, size_t i3 = 0) const

      Create a password hash using some scheme specific format. Parameters are as follows:

      * For PBKDF2, PGP-S2K, and Bcrypt-PBKDF, ``i1`` is iterations
      * Scrypt uses ``i1`` == ``N``, ``i2`` == ``r``, and ``i3`` == ``p``
      * Argon2 family uses ``i1`` == ``M``, ``i2`` == ``t``, and ``i3`` == ``p``

      All unneeded parameters should be set to 0 or left blank.

.. _pbkdf_example:

Code Examples
-------------

An example demonstrating using the API to hash a password using Argon2i:

.. literalinclude:: /../src/examples/pwdhash.cpp
   :language: cpp

Combining a password based key derivation with an authenticated cipher yields an
application that can encrypt and decrypt data using a password. Note that this
example does not incorporate any "associated data" into the AEAD. For instance,
a real application might want to include a version number of their file format
as associated data. See :ref:`aead` for more information.

.. literalinclude:: /../src/examples/password_encryption.cpp
   :language: cpp

Available Schemes
----------------------

General Recommendations
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you need wide interoperability use PBKDF2 with HMAC-SHA256 and at least 50K
iterations. If you don't, use Argon2id with p=1, t=3 and M as large as you
can reasonably set (say 1 gigabyte).

You can test how long a particular PBKDF takes to execute using the cli tool
``pbkdf_tune``::

  $ ./botan pbkdf_tune --algo=Argon2id 500 --max-mem=192 --check
  For 500 ms selected Argon2id(196608,3,1) using 192 MiB took 413.159 msec to compute

This returns the parameters chosen by the fast auto-tuning algorithm, and
because ``--check`` was supplied the hash is also executed with the full set of
parameters and timed.

PBKDF2
^^^^^^^^^^^^

PBKDF2 is the "standard" password derivation scheme, widely implemented in many
different libraries. It uses HMAC internally and requires choosing a hash
function to use. (If in doubt use SHA-256 or SHA-512). It also requires choosing
an iteration count, which makes brute force attacks more expensive. Use *at
least* 50000 and preferably much more. Using 250,000 would not be unreasonable.

Algorithm specification name:
``PBKDF2(<MessageAuthenticationCode|HashFunction>)``,
e.g. ``PBKDF2(HMAC(SHA-256))``

If a ``HashFunction`` is provided as an argument,
it will create ``HMAC(HashFunction)`` as the ``MessageAuthenticationCode``.
I.e. ``PBKDF2(SHA-256)`` will result in ``PBKDF2(HMAC(SHA-256))``.

Scrypt
^^^^^^^^^^

.. versionadded:: 2.7.0

Scrypt is a relatively newer design which is "memory hard" - in
addition to requiring large amounts of CPU power it uses a large block
of memory to compute the hash. This makes brute force attacks using
ASICs substantially more expensive.

Scrypt has three parameters, usually termed ``N``, ``r``, and ``p``.  ``N`` is
the primary control of the workfactor, and must be a power of 2. For interactive
logins use 32768, for protection of secret keys or backups use 1048576.

The ``r`` parameter controls how 'wide' the internal hashing operation is. It
also increases the amount of memory that is used. Values from 1 to 8 are
reasonable.

Setting ``p`` parameter to greater than 1 splits up the work in a way that up
to p processors can work in parallel.

As a general recommendation, use ``N`` = 32768, ``r`` = 8, ``p`` = 1

Algorithm specification name: ``Scrypt``

Argon2
^^^^^^^^^^

.. versionadded:: 2.11.0

Argon2 is the winner of the PHC (Password Hashing Competition) and
provides a tunable memory hard PBKDF. There are three minor variants
of Argon2 - Argon2d, Argon2i, and Argon2id. All three are implemented.

Algorithm specification names:

- ``Argon2d``
- ``Argon2i``
- ``Argon2id``

Bcrypt
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. versionadded:: 2.11.0

Bcrypt-PBKDF is a variant of the well known ``bcrypt`` password hashing
function.  Like ``bcrypt`` it is based around using Blowfish for the key
expansion, which requires 4 KiB of fast random access memory, making hardware
based attacks more expensive. Unlike Argon2 or Scrypt, the memory usage is not
tunable.

This function is relatively obscure but is used for example in OpenSSH.
Prefer Argon2 or Scrypt in new systems.

Algorithm specification name: ``Bcrypt-PBKDF``

OpenPGP S2K
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. warning::

   The OpenPGP algorithm is weak and strange, and should be avoided unless
   implementing OpenPGP.

There are some oddities about OpenPGP's S2K algorithms that are documented
here. For one thing, it uses the iteration count in a strange manner; instead of
specifying how many times to iterate the hash, it tells how many *bytes* should
be hashed in total (including the salt). So the exact iteration count will
depend on the size of the salt (which is fixed at 8 bytes by the OpenPGP
standard, though the implementation will allow any salt size) and the size of
the passphrase.

To get what OpenPGP calls "Simple S2K", set iterations to 0, and do not specify
a salt. To get "Salted S2K", again leave the iteration count at 0, but give an
8-byte salt. "Salted and Iterated S2K" requires an 8-byte salt and some
iteration count (this should be significantly larger than the size of the
longest passphrase that might reasonably be used; somewhere from 1024 to 65536
would probably be about right). Using both a reasonably sized salt and a large
iteration count is highly recommended to prevent password guessing attempts.

Algorithm specification name:
``OpenPGP-S2K(<HashFunction>)``, e.g. ``OpenPGP-S2K(SHA-384)``

PBKDF
---------

:cpp:class:`PBKDF` is the older API for this functionality, presented in header
``pbkdf.h``. It only supports PBKDF2 and the PGP S2K algorithm, not
Scrypt, Argon2, or bcrypt. This interface is deprecated and will be removed
in a future major release.

In addition, this API requires the passphrase be entered as a
``std::string``, which means the secret will be stored in memory that
will not be zeroed.

.. cpp:class:: PBKDF

   .. cpp:function:: static std::unique_ptr<PBKDF> create(const std::string& algo_spec, \
                                                          const std::string& provider = "")

      Return a newly created PBKDF object. The name should be in the
      format "PBKDF2(HASHNAME)", "PBKDF2(HMAC(HASHNAME))", or
      "OpenPGP-S2K".  Returns null if the algorithm is not available.

   .. cpp:function:: void pbkdf_iterations(uint8_t out[], size_t out_len, \
                            const std::string& passphrase, \
                            const uint8_t salt[], size_t salt_len, \
                            size_t iterations) const

      Run the PBKDF algorithm for the specified number of iterations,
      with the given salt, and write output to the buffer.

   .. cpp:function:: void pbkdf_timed(uint8_t out[], size_t out_len, \
                         const std::string& passphrase, \
                         const uint8_t salt[], size_t salt_len, \
                         std::chrono::milliseconds msec, \
                         size_t& iterations) const

      Choose (via short run-time benchmark) how many iterations to perform
      in order to run for roughly msec milliseconds. Writes the number
      of iterations used to reference argument.

   .. cpp:function:: OctetString derive_key( \
               size_t output_len, const std::string& passphrase, \
               const uint8_t* salt, size_t salt_len, \
               size_t iterations) const

   Computes a key from *passphrase* and the *salt* (of length
   *salt_len* bytes) using an algorithm-specific interpretation of
   *iterations*, producing a key of length *output_len*.

   Use an iteration count of at least 10000. The salt should be
   randomly chosen by a good random number generator (see
   :ref:`random_number_generators` for how), or at the very least
   unique to this usage of the passphrase.

   If you call this function again with the same parameters, you will
   get the same key.
